# Journal 2021-02-10

* Anki for poetry vs Readwise for poetry.
* Basic process: Downloading brain in wiki is annoying.
  * Links
  * Indents
* Use a markdown editor?

* Discussion
  * Anki vs Readwise for poetry
  * Basic process of inserting stuff into the wiki still annoying

  * Links: [like this]([https://www.google.com](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.google.com&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1612990454287000&usg=AOvVaw2bzqquOfZK7sVUzDlGrOzI))
  * Indents not working (agree this is annoying)
  * Using markdown editor? Also annoying.

  * McGilchrist: Potentially doing a salon with him

  * Emailed Vas already

  * MCG starts from civilization which is already problematic because we should be looking way earlier

  * Jaynes starts from an archeology perspective, way before McG starts (with civilization, literature, culture -- which is game over for Jaynes)

  * If the problems arise with the start of language, they can't have started in Ancient Athens. McGilchrist thinks that Athens is a mostly right-hemisphere society that needs more left
  * But if we're interested in phylogenetic questions, like the creations of categories in the first place, McGilchrist just starts way too late for this
  * Yaklovelian torque: Chimpanzees
  * If macular vision is controlled by the left hemisphere then it must start way before any of the stuff from the last few thousand years

  * McG believes he's arguing against Jaynes but he's actually providing more details/argument FOR Jaynes view
  * He gets Jaynes wrong, in part because of this schizophrenia issue. He believes that schizophrenia is "too much left brain" but this in some ways seems unlikely.
  * McGilchrist believes anger starts in the left hemisphere
  * Left is about delaying/distancing/planning which allows instrumental violence in pursuit of ultimate ends

  * Instrumental (proactive) Bivs reactive aggression is a huge distinction
  * Rage can be distinguish anger

  * Nietzsche: Punishment starts with reactive hitting children
  * Jaynes has two modes:

  * Bicameral, which ranges from everyone has direct access to gods all the way to mediated through strict hierarchies (like Egyptians)
  * Consciousness which is really more like metacognition/introspective awareness
  * Bicameral mind has its benefits: the long-view (not really right?) of building pyramids and such require the bicameral mind… so there are benefits (which McG totally denies)
  * McG presents an almost uninterrogated right brain supremacy view

  * How to steelman this argument?
  * It's a polemic against a left-brain society, cognitive science, rationalism, Effective Altruism, demotion of emotion
  * In the process of trying to level the right/left brain focus in science (generally), he gets Jaynes wrong and misses important distinctions and goes too far with what is good about right and bad about left

  * Overall timelines

  * Alpha male, hierarchy, high reactive violence. Rewards go to the strong.
  * Sociability is rewarded but not as much as violence.
  * Eventually, with coalition forming (tool use? Planning? language?) the tables turn. A critical threshold. Now sociability (planning to kill the alpha) is rewarded more than violence.
  * This is an example of bottom-up pressure overcoming top-down. Introducing the chaos of empowering weaker males disrupts the previous order, and this leads to a revolution.
  * Now any leader must not only appease but form stronger coalitions. It rewards planning and sociability.
  * Probably also involves deception.
  * Planned violence as cold and calculated, so it rewards left brain.

  * Work at fleshing out differential susceptibility (orchid vs dandelion children) in relation to survival, socialibility, and resilience

  * [https://slatestarcodex.com/2018/12/03/book-review-evolutionary-psychopathology/](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://slatestarcodex.com/2018/12/03/book-review-evolutionary-psychopathology/&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1612990454290000&usg=AOvVaw0tbICZLDlijoXJZQqkjpka)
  * Rule inversion: Thriving at extremes, like bullied kid who becomes CEO
  * Orchid children are highly sensitive to their environment, especially to the quality of parenting they receive. If neglected, orchid children promptly wither--but if they are nurtured, they not only survive but flourish [  ] Isabela flesh out

  * De Waal's work with Bonobos (vs chimps) and role of repair in group dynamics/cohesion and survival 

  * There's the role of tool-use as providing an opportunity for lesser males in the troop to form coalitions and become more powerful than the alpha; social capacities and processes become selected for with this innovation (tools) such that violence/aggression/physical power is no longer the most critical for selection 
  * BUT! De Waal's work (and others) with Bonobos but also chimps shows that "repair" or "reconciliation" processes (post violent outbursts/fights) are also key for determining the extent of closeness and collaborative effectiveness of a troop; those groups who could remain closely bonded (through processes like grooming), in turn, were healthier, happier, and stronger. And functioned better at the level of the group, but also in comparison to other troops who were less cohesive and therefore faired worse in inter-group fights

\- Anki for poetry vs Readwise for poetry.

\- Basic process: Downloading brain in wiki is annoying.

  \- Links

  \- Indents

\- Use a markdown editor?

\- [[6/2c1a]] Revolutions Break Bottlenecks

\- [[9/3g]] What Constitutes Abundance?

\- [[6/2c1b]] Revolutions Are recombinant

\- [[6/2c1c]] Revolutions make the Environment into Fuel

        \- e.g., oxygen is the product of photosynthesis… until it's not

        \- then used for cellular respiration that are far more efficient

        \- results may be mixed though (not always positive tradeoff)

\- [[6/2c1d]] Revolutions occur when far-from-equilibrium states persist

        \- Bitcoin and energy usage

\- [[6/2c1d1]] Energy overcomes inertia?

\- [[12/226b1]] They overcome inertia, are hard to get started

\- [[6/2c1e]] Revolutions overcome a barrier

\- [[6/2c1f]] Revolutions follow irruption/diaspora

\- [[6/2c1g]] Successful revolutions create new dependencies

\- [[1/109]] Revolutions kick the ladder out from under themselves

\- [[6/2c1h]] Revolutions start in a protected sandbox

\- [[6/2c1i]] Revolutions operate in hypercycles

\- [[6/2c1j]] Revolutions often create unexpected losers

\- [[6/2c1k]] Revolutions change the nature of the game

\- [[6/2c1l]] Some revolutions occur when top-down pressure is reduced

\- [[6/2c1m]] Some revolutions occur when chaos is reduced

\- [[6/2c1n]] Revolutions create new identity

\- [[6/2c1o]] Human revolutions follow a pattern

\- [[6/2c1p]] Revolutions kill diversity

\- [[12/38c11]] Revolutions produce a dying off period, but leave backups

\- [[6/2c1q]] Revolutions occur at phase transitions

\- [[6/2c1r]] Revolutions and arms races

\- [[6/2c1s]] Revolutions occur under pressure

\- [[6/2c1t]] Revolutions and scarcity

\- [[6/2c1u]] Revolutions require diversity

\- [[6/2c1v]] Revolutions stabilise out-of-equilibrium conditions

\- [[6/2c1x]] Revolutions follow vicious/virtuous cycles

\- [[6/2c1y]] Revolutions solve known & create unforeseeable problems

\- [[6/2c1z]] Revolutions homogenize/domesticate

\- [[6/2c1d1]] Energy overcomes inertia?

\- [[12/226b1]] They overcome inertia, are hard to get started

\- [[6/2c1e]] Revolutions overcome a barrier

\- [[6/2c1f]] Revolutions follow irruption/diaspora

\- [[6/2c1g]] Successful revolutions create new dependencies

\- [[1/109]] Revolutions kick the ladder out from under themselves

\- [[6/2c1h]] Revolutions start in a protected sandbox

\- [[6/2c1i]] Revolutions operate in hypercycles

\- [[6/2c1j]] Revolutions often create unexpected losers

\- [[6/2c1k]] Revolutions change the nature of the game

\- [[6/2c1l]] Some revolutions occur when top-down pressure is reduced

\- [[6/2c1m]] Some revolutions occur when chaos is reduced

\- [[6/2c1n]] Revolutions create new identity

\- [[6/2c1o]] Human revolutions follow a pattern

\- [[6/2c1p]] Revolutions kill diversity

\- [[12/38c11]] Revolutions produce a dying off period, but leave backups

\- [[6/2c1q]] Revolutions occur at phase transitions

\- [[6/2c1r]] Revolutions and arms races

\- [[6/2c1s]] Revolutions occur under pressure

\- [[6/2c1t]] Revolutions and scarcity

\- [[6/2c1u]] Revolutions require diversity

\- [[6/2c1v]] Revolutions stabilise out-of-equilibrium conditions

\- [[6/2c1x]] Revolutions follow vicious/virtuous cycles

\- [[6/2c1y]] Revolutions solve known & create unforeseeable problems

\- [[6/2c1z]] Revolutions homogenize/domesticate

\- They are fragile at first (build momentum?)

\- They modify their environment (same as fuel notion or different?)

\- [[12/38c3]] Revolutions topple incumbents

\- [[12/38c4]] Revolutionaries can't shape a revolution's effects

\- [[12/38c9]] Revolutions create new playing fields

\- [[6/2c1w]] Revolutions create faster playing fields

\- [[12/38c10]] Revolutions happen at different granularities

\- [[12/38c12]] Revolutions produce a period of "new models"

\- [[6/2c1c5]] Entropy bubbles

\- [[12/38c13]] Adam's list of revolutions

  * Genes code for things that are and will change and these revolutions happen 
  * Timing matters: critical periods for transformations that allow for them or do nothing at all

  * Part of the unique contribution of Bryan's work is to tell several example-stories of the Darwin account
  * We need to think and maybe organize our thinking (at times) around the fractal nature and iteratively constraining properties and fractal nature of:

  * (Physics time)
  * (Chemistry time)
  * Genetic evolutionary time
  * Culutural time
  * Ontogenetic time

  * Each of the above levels of change across time are hierarchically embedded and partially constrained by the level above (there should be no circular causality because time's arrow goes in only one direction… presumably)
  * Example of Janus-faces

  * Chimpanzee aggression in order to repair
  * Childhood development (apparently excitatory) is prompted/facilitated by inhibitory system
  * Learning by pruning. Pruning as selection.
  * GABA switches from excitatory to inhibitory
  * Hemoglobin switches direction/polarity
  * Dose-dependent responses? Alcohol/kratom in low/high dosage? Smokers modulating breath length?

  * Recombination: individual as having to shift to get around various filters. Butterflies: different environment. Babies, adolescents.
  * Where to start next time

  * [ ] Continue with characteristics of revolutions
  * [ ] Continue with timeline for humanity/civilization
  * [ ] Critical periods

  * Possible co-reading/watching

  * [ ] Robert Sapolsky's lectures on biological 
  * [ ] Sapolsky: [https://youtu.be/X9CnuCvfhEc](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://youtu.be/X9CnuCvfhEc&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1612990454297000&usg=AOvVaw3uE0iGfHQ0CSRyI-es9odb)
  * [ ] BK: Look into Lamarck

